.\" Copyright IBM Corp. 2014
.\" 
.\" The MIT License (MIT)
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to
.\" deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
.\" rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
.\" sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
.\" IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" Contributors:
.\"     IBM Corporation, Adhemerval Zanella - Initial implementation.
.\"     IBM Corporation, Rajalakshmi S - Initial implementation.
.TH LIBPAF 2014-04-13 "Linux" "Time Base Header"
.SH NAME
The Power Architecture Facilities - Timebase header 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <paf/tb.h>
.sp
.BI "uint64_t paf_timing_now(void);
.sp
.BI "void paf_timing_accum(uint64_t " *sum ", uint64_t " diff ");
.sp
.BI "uint64_t paf_timing_diff(uint64_t " start ", uint64_t " end ");
.sp

.SH DESCRIPTION

The Time Base header tb.h provides a mechanism to read the 
Time Base Register
.RB ( TB )
available on Power Architecture. This register follows the layout specified in
the corresponding Power ISA.

.PP
The function
.BR paf_timing_now()
reads the current value of the Time Base Register.
 
.PP
The function
.BR paf_timing_accum()
adds time difference to variable
.I *sum
.

The function
.BR paf_timing_diff()
computes difference between two times.
.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR paf_timing_now()
returns the current value of the Time Base Register.

.BR paf_timing_diff()
returns the difference between two times.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Program source
\&
.nf
#include <stdio.h>
#include <paf/tb.h>

int
main ()
{
  int i, j;
  uint64_t load_time, start, stop, sum = 0;

  for (i = 0; i < 3; i++)
    {
      start = paf_timing_now ();
      for (j = 0; j < 1000; j++);
      stop = paf_timing_now ();
      load_time = paf_timing_diff (start, stop);
      paf_timing_accum (&sum, load_time);
      printf ("Time taken by the for loop is %ld ticks\n", load_time);
    }
  printf ("Total time taken is %ld ticks\n",sum);
  return 0;
}

.ED

.SH REFERENCES
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.05
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.06
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.06+
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.07

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.PP
Email bug reports to Rajalakshmi S<raji@linux.vnet.ibm.com>.
.SH AUTHORS
This manual page was written by Rajalakshmi S<raji@linux.vnet.ibm.com>
and Adhemerval Zanella <azanella@linux.vnet.ibm.com>.


