.\" Copyright IBM Corp. 2013
.\" 
.\" The MIT License (MIT)
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to
.\" deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
.\" rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
.\" sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
.\" IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" Contributors:
.\"     IBM Corporation, Edjunior Barbosa Machado - Initial implementation.
.TH LIBPAF-DSC 2 2013-08-13 "Linux" "Data Stream Control Library"
.SH NAME
libpaf-dsc \- The Power Architecture Facilities Data Stream Control Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <paf/dsc.h>
.sp
.BI "uint64_t paf_dsc_check_support(void);
.sp
.BI "int paf_dsc_get(uint64_t " *dscr ");
.sp
.BI "int paf_dsc_set(uint64_t " dscr ");
.sp
Compile and link with \fI\-lpaf\-dsc\fP.

.SH DESCRIPTION

The Power Architecture\(rg Facilities
.B Data Stream Control Library
.RB ( libpaf-dsc )
is a part of the Power Architecture Facilities Library
.RB ( PAFLib )
.

The Data Stream Control Library provides a mechanism to interact with the Data
Stream Control Register
.RB ( DSCR )
available on Power Architecture. This register follows the layout specified in
the corresponding Power ISA, with the following defined flags.

These are features supported by Power ISA 2.05:
.LP
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR DSCR_SSE
Store Stream Enable.

.LP
These features were added on Power ISA 2.06:
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR DSCR_SNSE
Stride-N Stream Enable.

.LP
These features were added on Power ISA 2.06+:
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR DSCR_LSD
Load Stream Disable.

.LP
These are supported only on Power ISA 2.07:
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR DSCR_HWUE
Hardware Unit count Enable.
.IP \[bu] 2
.BR DSCR_SWUE
Software Unit count Enable.
.IP \[bu]
.BR DSCR_LTE
Load Transient Enable.
.IP \[bu]
.BR DSCR_STE
Software Transient Enable.
.IP \[bu]
.BR DSCR_HTE
Hardware Transient Enable.
.IP \[bu]
.BR DSCR_SWTE
Software Transient Enable. 

.PP
There are also other settings whose variable value can be accessed using the following macros:
.TP
.BR DSCR_DPFD_GET(dscr)
.TP
.BR DSCR_DPFD_SET(dscr, value)
Default Prefetch Depth. This field supplies a prefetch depth for
hardware-detected streams and for software-defined streams. The possible values
for this field are the following:
.IP \[bu] 2
0 default
.IP \[bu]
1 none
.IP \[bu]
2 shallowest
.IP \[bu]
3 shallow
.IP \[bu]
4 medium
.IP \[bu]
5 deep
.IP \[bu]
6 deeper
.IP \[bu]
7 deepest
.IP
This setting was introduced on Power ISA 2.05.
.TP
.BR DSCR_URG_GET(dscr)
.TP
.BR DSCR_URG_SET(dscr, value)
Depth Attainment Urgency. This field indicates how quickly the prefetch depth
should be reached for hardware-detected streams. These are the following
possible values:
.IP \[bu]
0 default
.IP \[bu]
1 not urgent
.IP \[bu]
2 least urgent
.IP \[bu]
3 less urgent
.IP \[bu]
4 medium
.IP \[bu]
5 urgent
.IP \[bu]
6 more urgent
.IP \[bu]
7 most urgent
.IP
This setting was added on Power ISA 2.06+.

.TP
.BR DSCR_UNITCNT_GET(dscr)
.TP
.BR DSCR_UNITCNT_SET(dscr, value)
Number of units in data stream. This field can have a value between 0 and 1023.
This setting was added on Power ISA 2.07.

.PP
For tips about how to use the macros above, see the section EXAMPLES.

.PP
The function
.BR paf_dsc_check_support()
checks the available DSCR features, returning the bit flags and fields
supported by the processor.
 
.PP
The function
.BR paf_dsc_get()
retrieves the current DSCR content and copies to
.I *dscr
.

The function
.BR paf_dsc_set()
sets the current DSCR content to
.I dscr
.

.SH RETURN VALUE
.BR paf_dsc_check_support()
returns a bitmask with the value of Data Stream Control Register or 0 if
unsupported.

.BR paf_dsc_get()
return 0 in case of success or -1 otherwise.

.BR paf_dsc_set()
return 0 in case of success or -1 otherwise.

.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B ENOSYS
if the system does not support DSCR facility.

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Program source
\&
.nf
#include <inttypes.h>
#include <paf/dsc.h>
#include <assert.h>

int main(void)
{
  uint64_t dscr, dscr_support;
  int dpfd_value;

  assert((dscr_support = paf_dsc_check_support()) > 0);

  /* Check if the system supports DSCR_SSE */
  if ((dscr_support | DSCR_SSE) == dscr_support)
    {
      assert(paf_dsc_get(&dscr) == 0);
      assert(paf_dsc_set(dscr | DSCR_SSE) == 0);
    }

  assert(paf_dsc_get(&dscr) == 0);

  /* Retrieve the current Default Prefetch Depth value */
  dpfd_value = DSCR_DPFD_GET(dscr);

  /* Check if the system supports DSCR_UNITCNT */
  if ((dscr_support | DSCR_UNITCNT_SET(dscr, 256)) == dscr_support)
    {
       dscr = DSCR_UNITCNT_SET(dscr, 256);
       assert(paf_dsc_set(dscr) == 0);
    }

  return 0;
}

.SH NOTES
In order to check if the DSCR instructions are supported by the kernel, the
library uses a signal handler for SIGILL during its initialization.

.SH VERSIONS
The Data Stream Control Register (DSCR) [Category: Stream] is a Power
Architecture hardware facility available since Power ISA 2.05 as
privileged-state, and ISA 2.07 as problem-state, that affects how the processor
handles hardware-detected and software-defined data streams.

DSCR emulation on pre-ISA 2.07 hardware is provided in Linux Kernel 3.10-cr1.
DSCR problem-state availability is exported in Linux Kernel 3.10-rc1.

.SH REFERENCES
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.05
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.06
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.06+
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.07

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.PP
Email bug reports to Edjunior B. Machado <emachado@linux.vnet.ibm.com>.
.SH AUTHORS
This manual page was written by Edjunior B. Machado <emachado@linux.vnet.ibm.com>
and Adhemerval Zanella <azanella@linux.vnet.ibm.com>.


