.\" Copyright IBM Corp. 2013, 2014
.\" 
.\" The MIT License (MIT)
.\" 
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to
.\" deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
.\" rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
.\" sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\" 
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
.\" FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS
.\" IN THE SOFTWARE.
.\" 
.\" Contributors:
.\"     IBM Corporation, Adhemerval Zanella - Initial implementation.
.TH LIBPAF-EBB 2 2013-07-01 "Linux" "Event-Based Branch Library"
.SH NAME
libpaf-ebb \- The Power Architecture Facilities Event-Based Branch Library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <paf/ebb.h>
.sp
.B typedef void (*ebbhandler_t)(void*);
.sp
.BI "int paf_ebb_pmu_init(uint64_t " raw_event ", int " group ");
.sp
.BI "int paf_ebb_pmu_init_ex(uint64_t " raw_event ", int " group ", pid_t " pid ",
unsigned int " flags");
.sp
.BI "void paf_ebb_pmu_set_period(uint32_t " sample_period ");
.sp
.BI "void paf_ebb_pmu_reset(void);
.sp
.BI "ebbhandler_t paf_ebb_register_handler(ebbhandler_t " handler ", \
void * "context ", paf_ebb_callback_type_t " type ", int " flags ");
.sp
.BI "ebbhandler_t paf_ebb_handler(void);
.sp
.BI "int paf_ebb_enable_branches(void);
.sp
.BI "int paf_ebb_disable_branches(void);
.sp
.BI "void paf_ebb_enable_branches_fast(void);
.sp
.BI "void paf_ebb_disable_branches_fast(void);
.sp
.BI "int paf_ebb_event_close (int " fd ");
.sp
Compile and link with \fI\-lpaf\-ebb\fP.

.SH DESCRIPTION

The Power Architecture\(rg Facilities
.B Event-Based Branch Library
.RB ( libpaf-ebb )
is a part of the Power Architecture Facilities Library
.RB ( PAFLib )
.

The Event-Based Branch Library provides an easy-to-use framework for using the Power Architecture Event-Based Branch facility
.RB ( EBB ).

If enabled, the EBB facility generates an
.I event-based exception
when a user-specified event occurs, which causes the hardware to branch
directly to a user-space address (EBB handler). The facility does not require
any kernel handling besides initialization.  Only Performance Monitor Unit
(PMU) events are supported.

The Event-Based Branch Library framework registers a proxy-handler with the hardware, on behalf of a user program, so that the program doesn't need to directly control the Power Architecture EBB facility (which would require assembly language instructions and an understanding of the EBB ELF ABI).

The EBB Library proxy-handler will properly stack an ELF ABI EBB exception frame on the user-stack, preserve the current register context in that stack frame, and then pass control to a user registered (thread specific) handler. When the user-space handler has completed its task and returned control to the EBB Library proxy-handler, the proxy-handler will perform the tasks necessary to restore the register context, pop the EBB exception frame, and return control to the code that was interrupted by the event-based exception.

.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init()
initializes the PMU event generation configuring the hardware
counter
.I raw_event
with the specified
.I group.
The first call should use -1 to start a new group. Subsequent calls may create
new groups or use the returned file descriptor from
.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init
to associate events in a group. The file descriptor returned should be closed when done to prevent resource leak.

The
.I event-based exception
is triggered when the PMU counter overflows. To set the PMC to an initial value different from default (0) use
.BR paf_ebb_pmu_set_period
To reset it to potentially
trigger another event call
.BR paf_ebb_pmu_reset().

.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init_ex()
initializes the PMU event generation configuring the hardware
counter
.I raw_event
with the specified
.I group
,
.I pid
,
.I cpu
and
.I flags.
The first call should use -1 to start a new group. Subsequent calls may create
new groups or use the returned file descriptor from
.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init
to associate events in a group.
The
.I pid
and
.I cpu
arguments allow specifying which process and CPU to monitor:
.TP
.BR "pid == 0" " and " "cpu == \-1"
This measures the calling process/thread on any CPU.
.TP
.BR "pid == 0" " and " "cpu >= 0"
This measures the calling process/thread only
when running on the specified CPU.
.TP
.BR "pid > 0" " and " "cpu == \-1"
This measures the specified process/thread on any CPU.
.TP
.BR "pid > 0" " and " "cpu >= 0"
This measures the specified process/thread only
when running on the specified CPU.
.TP
.BR "pid == \-1" " and " "cpu >= 0"
This measures all processes/threads on the specified CPU.
This requires
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
capability or a
.I /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
value of less than 1.
.TP
.BR "pid == \-1" " and " "cpu == \-1"
This setting is invalid and will return an error.
.P
The
.I flags
argument is passed directly to
.I perf_event_open
syscall.

.BR paf_ebb_register_handler()
registers the user
.I handler
.RB ( ebbhandler_t )
function to be called when the EBB is triggered with the argument
.I context.
Common state registers (LR, CR, CTR, XER) are always saved and
.I type
specifies which further set of registers will be saved and restored:

.TP
.BR PPCEBB_CALLBACK_GPR_SAVE:
save/restore all General Purpose Registers.
.TP
.BR PPCEBB_CALLBACK_FPR_SAVE:
save/restore all General Purpose Registers and all Floating-Point Register.
.TP
.BR PPCEBB_CALLBACK_VR_SAVE:
save/restore all General Purpose Registers, all Floating-Point Register, and all
Vector Registers (VMX).
.TP
.BR PPCEBB_CALLBACK_VSR_SAVE:
save/restore all General Purpose Registers, all Floating-Point Register, all
Vector Registers (VMX), and all Vector Scalar Registers (VSX).
.PP

The current support
.I
flags
is either 0 or a multibyte mask of bits with one or more of the following options:

.IP \[bu] 2
.BR PAF_EBB_FLAGS_RESET_PMU
after the callback activation the EBB machanism will be reset, similiar to a call to
.BR paf_ebb_pmu_reset
.PP

.BR paf_ebb_handler()
returns the registered handler previously issued by paf_ebb_register_handler().

The
.BR paf_ebb_enable_branches()
and
.BR paf_ebb_disable_branches()
enable/disable EBB triggering and add required memory synchonizations.  They also check if EBB is available.

The fast versions
.BR paf_ebb_enable_branches_fast()
and
.BR paf_ebb_disable_branches_fast()
aso enable/disable the EBB branches, however they do not check if EBB is available on the system, neither add memory synchonization after the mtspr call.


.BR paf_ebb_event_close()
closes PMU event.

.SH "RETURN VALUE"

.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init()
returns a file descriptor to be used in group association or -1 case of error.

.BR paf_ebb_pmu_init_ex()
returns a file descriptor to be used in group association or -1 case of error.

.BR paf_ebb_register_handler()
returns the registered handler or EBB_REG_ERR on error. On error
.I errno
is set appropriately.

.BR paf_ebb_handler()
returns the previous registered handler or EBB_REG_ERR if no handler has been registered. On error
.I errno
is set appropriately.

.BR paf_ebb_enable_branches()
and
.BR paf_ebb_disable_branches()
return 0 in case of success or -1 otherwise. On error
.I errno
is set appropriately.

.BR paf_ebb_event_close()
return 0 in case of success or -1 otherwise.


.SH ERRORS

.TP
.B ENOSYS
system does not support EBB facility.

.SH VERSIONS
The EBB facility is part of Power ISA [category: Server] first appearing in Power ISA 2.07.

Linux support for the EBB facility first appeared in Linux kernel version 3.10.

Support for the ELF EBB ABI first appeared in glibc version 2.18 though the ABI is not runtime incompatible with backporting to earlier glibc versions.

.SH EXAMPLE

The following example show how to setup a simple EBB handler to update a global counter.

.nf
.sp
#include <stdio.h>
#include <paf/ebb.h>
#include <unistd.h>

#define PM_RUN_INST_CMPL  0x400FA

/* Set it volatile to force memory read in loop below.  */
static volatile int ebb_handler_triggered = 0;

static void ebb_handler(void *context)
{
  int *trigger = (int*) (context);
  *trigger += 1;
}

void do_work (void)
{
  while (1)
    {
      if (ebb_handler_triggered == 1000)
        break;
    }
}

int do_ebb(void)
{
  ebbhandler_t handler;
  ebb_handler_triggered = 0;
  int ebb_fd;

  ebb_fd = paf_ebb_pmu_init (PM_RUN_INST_CMPL, -1);

  paf_ebb_pmu_set_period (500000);

  handler = paf_ebb_register_handler (ebb_handler,
                                      (void*)&ebb_handler_triggered,
                                      PAF_EBB_CALLBACK_GPR_SAVE,
                                      PAF_EBB_FLAGS_RESET_PMU);

  paf_ebb_pmu_reset ();

  paf_ebb_enable_branches ();

  do_work ();

  paf_ebb_disable_branches ();

  printf ("Done; %d EBB interrupts handled\\n", ebb_handler_triggered);

  close (ebb_fd);

  return 0;
}

int main (int argc, char *argv[])
{
  return do_ebb ();
}
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR libpaf-dsc (3)

.SH REFERENCES
.TP
.B Power ISA\(tm Version 2.07
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.PP
Email bug reports to Adhemerval Zanella <azanella@linux.vnet.ibm.com>.
.SH AUTHORS
This manual page was written by Adhemerval Zanella <azanella@linux.vnet.ibm.com> and Ryan S. Arnold.
